WOODRUFF: As we've heard,
President Trump has voiced,
at times, contradictory views
on the U.S.'s relationship
with its European
allies and with Russia.
To parse out where things stand
after the first full day of
the president's trip abroad
and the road ahead, we
turn to Paula Dobriansky.
She was under secretary
of state for democracy
and global affairs
during the George W. Bush
administration.
She's now a senior fellow
at Harvard University and
she joins us from Warsaw.
And Karen Donfried was special
assistant to the president and
senior director for European
affairs on the National
Security Council during
the Obama administration.
She's now the president
of the German Marshall
Fund in the U.S., an
organization which seeks
to straighten
relations with Europe.
And we welcome both
of you to the program.
Paula Dobriansky, to
you first in Warsaw.
Overall, what would you say
the message is from President
Trump that's come across to
his European listeners?
PAUL DOBRIANSKY, FORMER
GEORGE W. BUSH STATE
DEPARTMENT OFFICIAL:
Well, the primary message
was that European security
matters to us greatly,
that towards that end that
the forward deployment
of our troops on the
border matter greatly.
They reassure not just the
Poles but the neighborhood.
And also the important of the
alliance, that Article 5, our
collective defense is crucial
and toward that end, that
alliance has played an
important role in the past.
It does now and it
will in the future.
And let me just add, combined
with that, it was very clear
that, related, the president
also made it very clear that he
was very concerned about Russian
aggression and the need to have
a cessation of the violence
and the conflict in Ukraine,
as well as in Syria.
He talked about Islamic radical
terrorism, and then he also
talked about energy security,
which hasn't gotten a lot of
attention and it's behind me
here at the royal castle where
he gave a speech actually before
what's called the Three Seas
Summit, an initiative paid
by the Poles, the Croats and
there were 12 countries from
Central Europe that spoke to
this issue about the need
for energy dependents,
energy security and
energy efficiency and
the establishment
of an infrastructure
in Central Europe.
WOODRUFF: Karen Donfried, are
those the main messages that
to you have come across from
this trip?
KAREN DONFRIED, FORMER OBAMA
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL STAFF:
There were two things that
struck me about President
Trump's stop in Poland.
One was what a big boost
this was to the current
Polish government.
Poland is an overwhelmingly
pro-American country and that's
significant in the context of a
European Union that's been
quite critical of democratic
backsliding in Poland.
So, the European Commission
has been looking at whether
Poland is staying true to rule
of law, independent judiciary,
freedom of the press.
So, it was very significant
for this Polish government.
The second thing that struck
me was the speech he gave
that Paula just referred to.
On the one hand, had
many elements of the
traditional transatlantic
speech, reaffirming
U.S. commitment to the
Article 5, the collective
defense piece of the NATO
alliance, his support
for strong transatlantic
relationship.
But then on the other hand,
you had a dark view of a clash
of civilizations and you had
it on your opening clip, the
president's comment about the
West and our ability to stand up
to this challenge.
And I think some people
are wondering how we in
the U.S. under President
Trump are defining
that West.
WOODRUFF: Well, how do
you respond to that,
Paula Dobriansky?
Because it did raise, I think,
questions in people's minds
about what is this conflict
as the president sees it?
DOBRIANSKY: Well, first, I
think that Karen was right,
the president did highlight the
importance over decades of the
Polish relationship with the
United States and even cited the
roles of such generals,
Kosciuszko and Pilsudski.
So, our relationship
has mattered greatly.
I saw it in a broader
context, though, than
Karen had expressed.
I saw it as a bond.
And on the other issue,
I saw and looked at the
words that he enunciated.
He really spoke a great deal
to freedom, to liberty, to
captive nations, he referred to
in his remarks.
He did talk about the importance
of values and even towards the
end of the speech expressed
how it's not just only about
military might, but it is also
about the will -- the will
of the people and,
towards that end, I did
not see that as a dark.
I saw that as underscoring
the kind of values that
we do hold very dearly.
WOODRUFF: So, if he was
stressing the common
values, Karen Donfried,
how then do you read
what the president has said?
Because we know it was on his
other trip to Europe where
he withheld a statement about
so-called Article 5, the mutual
commitment to defense among
the NATO countries, but this
time he did.
I mean, how do you square that?
DONFRIED: So, on the one hand,
I don't think we would have
been so focused on the more
traditional aspects of
the speech were it not
to the earlier trip
to Europe for a NATO
leaders meeting where the
president did not affirm
U.S. support for Article 5.
That's why it was significant.
But in that transatlantic
context, it was also significant
that he didn't mention the
European Union because
typically, the U.S. has
defined its relationship
with Europe both
through NATO, but also through
U.S. cooperation with this body
that emphasizes cooperation
among Europeans.
The second piece I would
mention is, I was struck by the
focus on values but I actually
searched the speech for the
word democracy, and it didn't
appear and that was striking
to me.
And though he did talk about
the importance of rule of law
and freedom of press in the
speech, when you looked at the
press conference he gave with
President Duda, he was asked
about the issue of the
press and said -- expressed
his concern about fake
news and the dishonest
media.
So, it was a bit of a
mixed message I thought
on those issues around
democratic principles.
WOODRUFF: Paula Dobriansky,
what about that?
I mean, we know the president's
view toward the press in the
United States has certainly
been a subject of controversy
and a lot of discussion
and debate recently.
DOBRIANSKY: Well, I think,
in the speech, which was his
primary platform, in my view,
not the press conference but the
primary platform where he had
an opportunity not just to speak
to Poland but, as I mentioned,
to the region at large, and
also to set the foundation for
his meetings coming up in
Hamburg and particularly
with President Putin
where he did underscore
this importance, as
I said, of communism.
He talked about it, about the
freedoms that were deprived,
the kind of oppression that
this region was under and how,
in terms of the present time,
this is a different period.
This is a period where
we do have to reaffirm
these kinds of values.
So, I saw it in a
broader strategic sense
of setting a foundation
that has applicability
to a number of the issues
that we've just mentioned,
not just Poland, the region at
large, but also for Russia.
WOODRUFF: Karen Donfried,
just about 30 seconds here.
But how does all this play
into expectation for tomorrow's
meeting between President Trump
and President Putin?
DONFRIED: So, it becomes much
more complicated for President
Trump when he gets -- well,
he is now in
Germany for the G20.
The Germany context is more
complicated, because you have a
German chancellor who's facing
reelection campaign
in September.
She has a public that
is not supportive of
President Trump's policies.
She very much values the
relationship with the U.S., so
she wants to try to reach an
agreement with President Trump
while also staying true to her
principle stands on climate
and trade.
So, it will become
very challenging.
The meeting with President Putin
will be something everyone will
be watching and it sounds, based
on his comments to the press
conference today, that he won't
be raising the issue of Russian
meddling in U.S. elections.
WOODRUFF: Yes.
He certainly -- he said,
yes, it may have happened
but it may not have.
He said nobody knows for
sure who was behind it.
DONFRIED: Which was
also a rebuke of U.S.
intelligence, I would say.
WOODRUFF: Karen Donfried, Paula
Dobriansky, we thank you both.
DONFRIED: Thank you so much.